Congratulations on making it to the end of the minuscule section of the complete web developer of course
you've covered a huge amount and we've been working steadily towards creating our own web app with a
completely functional logging system.
And that's what we're going to be doing in this challenge.
So I've split it into two parts and I'm first going to show you the final output of what we're going
to be making and then I'll show you what we're aiming for in this first video.
So obviously we've got a nice looking bootstrap styled page and we can switch between Sign up and log
in by clicking the link at the bottom there.
If we
try and sign up without a password or something like that we get nice error messages.
And once we do sign up just use a random email address.
We are treated to a lovely big text area where the user can enter their
deepest thoughts and they're updated in the database as soon as the user has typed them so they don't
even need to click a save button.
And then of course the user can log out and come back to the home page.
So that's what we're going to be producing.
It's pretty cool.
But what we're after in this first video is something a lot less pretty but not necessarily a lot less
functional.
So what I want to do here is kind of abstract the logon system.
So we've got a sign up form and a in form both of which have an option to stay logged in which is going
to create a cookie to keep the user logged in permanently even if they shut down the browser.
And this has got all of the same
validation built in.
But when you sign up or log in successfully it just logs you into a page that says you are logged in
and gives them the option to log out.
So the reason I've separated it is because this will give you a robust and flexible locking system that
you could use for pretty much any site that required you to sign up.
So you've got all the skills to do this yourself because well go for it
or then.
Hey guys I'm going to begin by making the HDMI will sign up for and this is going to be pretty similar
to the phone that we made a few years ago with the exception that we're also going to allow the user
to stay logged in using a cookie.
So hey guys we're going to have a forum and I'm going to stick with post
and then I'm going to have an input with a type of email.
It's going to have a name of him as well.
And a place holder of your e-mail
will have similar for the password.
So type of password name equals password and placeholder and just have password
and then we can have a checkbox
with a name of stay logged in and a value of 1.
And finally we're going to have an input with a type of submit and a valley of sign up.
All right let's take a look.
That's fine except that know what I'm doing with my checkbooks.
Should've been an input with a type of checkbooks just try that again.
Great.
Obviously we'll add the labels for these later on.
But for now let's just do a quick test.
Sign up seems to be submitting the form well.
And then let's just add
some ph pay to test first off if there is a post variable.
So if Auray key exists and one way around looking for the email or password is to actually look for
the submit
which if they click on that button to submit the form which they have to submit the form.
There's definitely going to be I submit variable in there so we could actually look for Reiki exists
and look for the submit key within the post array
and if that does exist for now we'll just
display the paste Fatty's.
So it's just the ways and again and there we get so caught email password stay logged in and submit.
Excellent.
So let's do some validation.
We'll have an area variable which is initially empty and then if they haven't entered an email address
will append to the error.
An email address
is required
and will do the same for password
and I'm not going to do any email validation to check that it's a valid email or I'm not going to have
multiple password fields to check against each other as well.
Just for simplicity we've done those before and you can add those if you like.
So then we'll say
if there is an error the error string is not empty.
Then we'll say something like hara equals
there were errors in your form
and then we'll have the specific error messages and I'll just pop a line break again at the end of each
of those not like it's really needed at the end of the password but we might want to add further ones
on and it's not going to break anything.
So then down here as we've seen before we'll have a div with an ID of error.
And we'll carry the error message there which will obviously be blank if there isn't one
OK.
So let's try putting just an email address in.
It does have to be valid.
Yeah that's very strange of me.
I changed the password for some reason
try that again.
Excellent.
There are errors in your form.
A password is required.
And similarly if I put a password in.
Then we get an e-mail address error.
If I put an e-mail address in and a password then we don't get any errors.
William.
All right.
So if there isn't an error our next step is to see if that e-mail address is taken.
And for that we'll need access to our database.
So I've got my control panel up and ready to go here.
I'm going to create a new database because we're doing everything from scratch.
So clicking on my Escurial databases and I'm going to call it secret deal.
I notice that you're limited to nine characters here.
So I'm just going to leave it at that.
If you're using a different system you might be able to have a longer name but it doesn't really require
one.
So that will work fine.
And then we'll generate a password and create the database quite.
So then let's scroll down to get the details.
There we go.
That's what we're going to need to connect.
But first off let's jump into the HP my admin and create the data structure.
So I'd always recommend using something like HP my admin to manage your database so when you're actually
creating tables or columns then do that in a nice interface like this and then use your code to just
add and edit and search items within your database as necessary.
So we'll just call it uses again.
And I'm going to have five columns.
I never know quite how many columns I'm going to need but five seems reasonable.
And if you don't use them all then that's fine.
Anyway so I'm going to start as always with an ID that's an integer and it's going to alter increments
and it's going to be a primary key.
Then I'm going to have the email address I'm going to have my password and I'm going to have my diary.
So that's going to be the actual content of the diary which we obviously won't need until later on.
But we'll put it in now anyway.
And those two will be text.
I think that's all we'll need.
We'll find out later on.
OK so now if we look at that obviously there's no users in there as yet.
So now it's time to connect to our database from our script.
So we'll do that here.
So we'll have a link which is going to be a secure ally connect and we're on the same server as our
database server.
So I can use localhost if we weren't I would have to use that IP address that
then we have the user name
for our database.
Then we're going to have the password.
But while I've got it in my clipboard remember on our web hosting the database name is the same as the
user name.
So I'm going to paste that in there as well.
And then we can grab the password and put that in there too.
Then we'll do our check to see if there is in my ask your ally CONNECT THE
And if there is then we'll end the scrip and we'll just put a database
connection era.
All right.
With any luck they will be connected to the database and then when we're here we can do our check to
see if there is a use up with the e-mail address but our new user has entered.
So let's set up a query can we select ID from uses
when email is equal to A and then we're going to ask you well I
real escape.
String
and then the post email variable so that you'll remember escapes any strange characters and any naughtiness
that the user might be using to access our system and our pop
limit on there not that it really matters.
But I like to have a limit unless it's really not necessary.
Then you run the query so results my ask you I query using the link and the query and using link that
just reminded me that I've forgotten to put it in there for the my secure real escape screen as well.
Then I'm going to check my ask you out.
I know I'm Rose as we saw before from the result and I wanted to see if that is bigger than 0 and if
it is will I carry that email address is taken.
In fact let's not echo it.
Let's set our error a variable equal to it and then it will be echoed down there.
And if that's not the case we actually want to sign the user up.
So let's run our query this is going to be insert into
uses and we're inserting two fields.
Email
and password and the values for those fields are going to be the e-mail address which we've already
got escaped my van
and also the password which Remember we're going to hash but I want to hash it with the ID of the user
in the database and we don't know what that is yet.
So I'm going to very temporarily store the password unhatched them will immediately updated
OK and then we'll run that query
and just before we do the updating the password bit I'm just going to run this because I've written
a lot of code and I wouldn't be surprised if there's some errors in it.
So let's have a look.
While we're still working.
Yes.
I often forget my link and I actually had a check to see if that's worked.
I think I'll check specifically if it hasn't worked and will add an error.
Could not
sign you up.
Please try again later.
And for now let's have a quick OK sign up successful.
So that's what we want to see.
Let's have a look.
All right.
I've got something that looks very promising.
Let's have a look in the database.
We have our new user fabulous.
So now then if the user tries to sign up again with those details he should say that e-mail address
is taken.
So the next thing to do then is update the passwords to a properly hashed password and to do that will
need the ID of the inserted row which we could get by doing a query from it.
But there's actually a really nice way of getting that ID and that is using MY as well I insert ID and
that actually gives us the ID of the most recently inserted element in our database which is really
handy.
So that's going to give us what we need.
So that means I want to update the password using an empty five hash.
Involving this.
So let's set up our query and we want to update we just get rid of that for the moment update uses and
we want to set password equal to say
and we want to do an empty five of
the Post-it password.
You remember we want to Salt's that with an empty five of the mice ally insert ID.
So this will take the mice you will insert Id said the ID of the row that weve just created you will
M.D 5 it it will then appends that to the password that they've put in.
It will M.D five that and then it will set that to be the password for our user and we want to set that
to be the case where the ID is equal to.
And again we want ask your ally insert ID we could stop there but I'm going to pop a limit one on the
end just in case something goes horribly wrong.
All right then once again we'll run the query.
Site Link and Querrey and then shared encode the password for us so let's have a new user at gmail dot
com with some password and then we'll sign them up haha.
A good warning then the mice Correll I insert ID does require the link
variable to get in there.
So let's have another new user.
G-mail.
The very simple password OK.
We've got Sign-Up successful that's looking good.
Let's now have a look at our database and we should find it.
There we go.
So how other new user has a nicely hashed password in there.
Let's get rid of these unsecure ones.
Because they're dirtying how database as it stands.
We don't want that
it's.
So now we're going to set up the sessions and if requested the cookie.
So let's start by adding session start to the beginning of our script.
And then we'll set the session id to be equal to again my secure ally insert ID so the ID of our new
user.
And finally we'll check to see if they have requested to stay logged in.
And that will be the case if stay logged in is equal to 1.
And if it is then we'll set a cookie as well.
So that's going to be Heidi it's going to have a value of my secure ally insert ID link and a time of
the current time.
Plus 1 minutes and an hour 24 want to go for the whole hog 365 so that will really keep them locked
in for a long time.
All right.
So now we've set the session and the cookie we're going to do a redirect.
So I'm just going to nip back to fire FTB and create a new file.
And this is going to be logged in page to page.
We are going to have one logged in page so I can just call it that but you're going to probably want
to be a little bit more descriptive with your file names.
So I looked in page we're then going to edit
and is going to be pretty simple.
So we're going to start our session
and we're going to check to see if there's a cookie so older using horæ key exists.
And the key that we're looking for is I.D.
and we're looking for it in the cookie right.
And if that's the case then we'll set the session id equal say
the cookie ID.
So that's a pretty simple way to have a session and cookies set up in one go.
So if the user has a cookie then we update the session to equal it.
And then we can refer to the session everywhere else.
And essentially we just recreate the session every time that we need to.
And then we'll check to see if there's a session.
So again if a key exists and this time we're looking for the same key we're looking in the session right.
So if that's the case will echo logged in and we'll give them a link to log out.
And the way I'm going to do this is to link back to index top HP but with a flag saying log out is equal
to one so that's a get variable which essentially says logged me out and will deal with that back in
index ph P
so that we logout link the paragraph there as well.
OK so that's if they are logged in if they're not logged in I'm just going to redirect them back to
the home page and we do that with a header of location index top BHP
OK.
So let's check first off.
The redirect works when they're are lockdowns.
So if we run to log in page to people should we get link straight back to index ph HP which has acquired
a warning.
We'll deal with that in a minute.
And then hopefully if we lock them when we get to that page it will show us the logged in and they give
us the logout link.
So let's say that and close that down for now.
Use just command or control on Windows to close that and let's have a quick look at this area.
So we want to I guess as we saw before we want to create the error variable before we check for a post
variable
OK.
So instead of saying sign up successful we now want to link them or redirect them to the logged in page
wonderful.
So let's sign up Roback Rob dot com and we'll try a permanent sign up see how that goes.
There we go.
So we've redirected and it clearly knows that we're locked in because it's displaying the locked in
message.
So let's click logout.
Excellent that links us back to the home page with logout is equal to 1.
So all that remains for that bit is to log the user out and we'll do this right here.
So if
a key exists and then we're looking for the logout key just going to check that yet the log out key
within the get it right.
And if that exists then we want to look these are out.
So we'll unset
the session we'll set the cookie into the past
time minus 60 times 60.
And I like to just
set the cookie
to an empty string just in case it gets accessed later on.
Not that it should.
Remember it takes an extra refresh for the cookie variable to actually be destroyed and then we'll add
in here that if they're not logging out we'll have a check to see if they are logged in because we don't
want them seeing the log in form if they're already logged in.
So if
the right key exists ID session
call
right key exists.
Id
cookie
then will redirect them to the logged in page.
All right.
So if we sign up now.
With a cookie then we redirect over to the logged in page.
If we attempt to go back to the home page then it just redirects us back to the logging logged in page.
But if we log out and we're now properly logged out and it doesn't do the redirect.
Brilliant.
So this is now set up more or less as we want.
The one thing that we're missing is a log in form.
So let's add that down here and that's going to look very much like the sign up form and it's going
to behave very much like it as well.
The difference is
we're going to have a log in value instead of sign up.
There we go.
Now one thing we're going to need to do up here when we're doing our post is to know whether we're attempting
to sign the user up or log them in.
Now one way we could do it is to look at the value of the submit variable but that's not very neat because
we might want to change the word sign up to register or something like that.
We don't want to have to update our code to take account of a change in the look of the Web site.
So what I'm going to work with that is to have a hidden variable
which is just an input that doesn't display on the HDMI at all.
But we can use it in our code.
So that's going to have a name of
sign up and a value of one and then down here.
We're going to have exactly the same thing but sign up is going to have a value of Siri because we're
looking at OK.
So let's see what we need to change.
Logging in that we still want to do the database connection obviously we still want to check to see
if there's an email we still want to check if there's a password so we can leave those parts in.
But this part here is going to be different.
Site I'm going to split this all up.
So we're now checking to see if
post sign up.
Just make sure I've put that right.
Yep.
Is equal to one.
Then we're going to do all of this Sign-Up stuff and just make it bigger so we can see what's going
on.
And you can see we've got a handy green market there.
So that's the end of the sign up section.
So I'm going to put that fair and else
I'm for now I'll just put
logging in because I want to check that I've done that correctly.
So that should do all of this.
If it's a sign up and if not we'll get a message saying logging in
OK.
I think that's probably because I've put this
in the wrong place.
Think you should probably be that one.
Curly brackets down there.
Easily them.
So let's just check that's the form validation is working on the log in excellent.
Yep that's looking promising.
And then
that's day a full logon.
Great.
So it's going to the right bit of the script.
And let's just make sure that we've got
the variables that we need.
Just last page last parse out the way let's resubmit that.
Great.
So we've got our e-mail and we've got our password so we're going to need to do a query to see if the
users got a username and password correct.
So let's set up a query.
So we want to select ID from our users table where and we want e-mail to be equal to a
Eskew.
I real escape string Don't forget the link and the posted e-mail and that's it for now note.
We can check the password at this point because we don't know the idea of the user and therefore we
don't know the sold to our password hashing.
So we need to get the e-mail check the e-mail first and then let's get the query
link and query
and then
we'll set.
He will say my secure ally fetch her right.
The result
and then we're checking to see if the right key exists and that's the ID field in the row right.
And if it does create it could hashed password which is going to be empty five
and then we're going to empty five day road Id.
Combine that with the password that the user has printed and that will be our entered hash password.
And in fact I'm going to change that to a select store select everything because then we can just check
if ashed password is equal to the saved password in the database.
So if it is then we want to set the session id to the right ID
and we also want to set the cookie if necessary and redirect.
Now I probably should put that in a separate function because I'm using it twice but I'm going to be
a bit lazy here.
Got a lot of new stuff and I think it's probably slightly simpler to just have this
code twice for now.
So if state logging is equal to one the must have the ID of the cookie.
Not to my secure ally insert ID but the Road ID and then will do the redirect.
All right.
So that was quite a lot of new stuff then.
I haven't broken anything.
No script still works at least.
So let's sign up first.
So we have SDF at ISEF to come and a password of a SDF sign up that still works great.
Then log out and then log in with the same details.
Excellent.
So that log in has worked.
Let's just make sure that if we log in with them with an incorrect e-mail address for example that should
not work.
Well it hasn't worked which is good but we do have a warning.
So let's just fix that line 95.
Let's have a look.
OK.
So because the right doesn't exist.
Checking for key within it doesn't really make sense.
So let's used if is set instead and that we'll check to see if the right array exists at all and that
then you should avoid that message which it does but that has reminded me that we have to add an error
message and say if it doesn't we'll set the error.
See
that e-mail slash password combination
could not be found.
And don't forget the Sammy Kellum
resubmit.
Excellent.
And if we get the e-mail address right password wrong then it doesn't know because then which is good
but we don't have an error message.
So that should go that
well again I don't quite like having that message twice.
But I think putting in the code to combine it into one is not quite worth it.
And we'll just make this rather unnecessarily more complicated than it needs to be.
So let's just check.
We now have a message.
Fantastic.
So that's as far as I'm going to go in this video.
What you have here is a solid and secure sign in system that you can use on any Web site.
There's nothing specific to Secret Diary other than the database name
and that of course you would change anyway.
So that's a really good general purpose bit of code and it forms a solid basis for our secret diary
web app as well.
All right.
So we'll stop and we'll carry straight on with our secret diary web app.
In the next video actually just before we move on.
There is one thing I want to clarify here.
And one issue that we've got with the set up as it stands and that is if we look ourselves in let's
just create a new account and then log out.
That all works fine.
But if we then go back to index or page without the logout get variable then it actually still thinks
we're logged in.
And that's because of the delay of unsetting the session and setting the cookie backwards as well.
So the array key exists even though the actual variable itself doesn't have a value or its value is
zero.
So I'm going to fix that by adding an extra couple of bits to the if statement because what I want to
avoid doing is just if I get rid of that temporarily I want to avoid doing that because even though
that will work it will give me a warning and I want to avoid the warnings because if that doesn't exist
then I'm assuming that it exists by doing this by doing the check on it.
So what I'm going to do is check for both
the Araik the existing and the ID actually having a value or
the cookie existing
and the cookie having a value
and that gets around a problem because if the array key for the session variable doesn't exist then
it won't do the check on session ID so we won't get an error.
And similarly for the cookie if there Reiki doesn't exist it won't do the check on the cookie itself.
So that avoids the false redirect problem.
But without giving us a warning.
So now you can say we're not being redirected.
All right.
On with the secret diary.